## Materials & Methods {.page_break_before}

### Tooth selection

A total of 104 extracted human permanent mandibular canines were collected from university medical centers in southwest Germany and Switzerland.
All teeth included were extracted for reasons unrelated to the study and are so-called excess material making an institutional review board approval unnecessary for the purpose of this investigation.
The teeth were single-rooted and investigated according to their morphologic criteria.
Inclusion criteria for teeth selection were complete coronal and root development and the absence of root fracture and resorption, coronal and radicular caries and endodontic treatment.
Calculus as well as hard and soft tissue was removed using an ultrasonic scaler.
Afterwards, the teeth were placed for one hour in a 3% hydrogen peroxide ultrasonic bath and then stored in 70% ethanol [@doi:10.1016/j.joen.2020.03.002; @doi:10.1016/j.joen.2019.11.006; @doi:10.1016/j.joen.2018.10.019; @doi:10.1016/j.joen.2015.09.007; @doi:10.1038/ijos.2017.29].

### Micro-CT-based morphological analysis

The 104 samples were imaged on a Bruker SkyScan 1272 high-resolution micro-CT machine (Control software version 1.1.19, Bruker microCT, Kontich, Belgium).
To facilitate the scanning of this large batch of samples, we used the automatic sample changer to enable us to scan batches of 16 teeth without any intervention.
In addition to the sample changer, the machine is equipped with a Hamamatsu L11871\_20 X-ray source and a XIMEA xiRAY16 camera.
We used a custom-made sample-holder to scan the teeth on the sample changer.
The sample holder was 3D-printed on a Form 2 desktop stereolithography printer (Formlabs, Somerville, Massachusetts, USA) and is freely available online (https://git.io/JJbAZ) as part of a library of sample holders [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.2587555.].
The X-ray source was set to a tube voltage of 80.0 kV and a tube current of 125.0 µA, the x-ray spectrum was filtered by 1mm of Aluminium prior to incidence onto the sample. For each sample, depending on the sample height, we recorded a set of either 4 or 5 stacked scans overlapping its height.
Each stack was recorded with 482 TIFF projections of 1632 x 1092 pixels at every 0.4° over a 180° sample rotation.
Every single projection was exposed for 950 ms and 3 projections were averaged to greatly reduce image noise.
This resulted in a scan time of approximately 40 minutes per stack and between 2 hours and 40 minutes to 3 hours and 15 minutes per sample.
In total, we thus scanned for approximately 13 days.
On average, we recorded 7.88 GB of raw data for each tooth, totalling 819 GB for all 104 teeth.
The obtained projection images were subsequently reconstructed into a 3D stack of axial PNG images spanning the whole length of each tooth with NRecon (Version 1.7.4.6, Bruker microCT, Kontich Belgium) using a ring artifact correction of 14.
The whole process resulted in datasets with an isometric voxel size of 10.0 µm.
The teeth were all slightly different in height and on average we had about 2700 reconstructions per teeth and a total of approximately 280000 files for all teeth.
The reconstructed PNG slices per tooth are on average 3.13 GB in size, totalling approximately 326 GB for all 104 teeth.

### Image processing

We wrote a Jupyter  [@https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/403913/] notebook with Python code which allowed for scans to be checked as soon as they were reconstructed during scanning of the first items in the batch.
Re-runs of the notebook added newly scanned and reconstructed teeth to the analysis, facilitating preliminary checks and analysis of already scanned teeth.
The notebook used for the analysis presented in this manuscript is freely available online [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3999402].
The important steps of the analysis steps are described in detail below.

#### Preparation

In a first step we extracted all necessary parameters from the log file of each scan to store into a *Pandas* [@doi:10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a] dataframe for comparison and verification of all the necessary scan parameters of each scanned tooth with all the others.
Afterwards, the preview image of each scan was loaded and an overview image of all the scans was generated (see Figure @fig:overviews, in which we show a randomly selected subset of the whole tooth cohort).

![Overview images for a random selection of 24 of the 104 teeth.
  It is immediately visible that several teeth slipped down in the holder.
  Since we were particularly interested in the bottom part of the teeth (top in this view) this poses no problem for further analysis.
  The irregular brightness along the vertical axis stems from the rudimentary stitching process of the overview images and is not visible in the reconstructed slices.](images/ScanOverviews.png){#fig:overviews}

We used *Dask* [@https://dask.org/] to read the set of axial reconstruction PNG slices for each sample.
The *Zarr* library [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3773451] was used to efficiently store a chunked, compressed, two-dimensional array representation of the reconstructions on disk for further analysis, with a total size of 330 GB on disk.

#### Dataset cropping

To reduce the size of the data on disk, we cropped the datasets to their minimal amount, i.e. to the smallest cuboid encompassing the full tooth.
This was done by segmenting the dataset into tooth and background using a common, fixed gray-value threshold for all datasets.
From this refined dataset, we removed small noise by removing small speckles with the [`remove_small_object`](https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.morphology.html\#skimage.morphology.remove_small_objects) function of *scikit-image* [@doi:10.7717/peerj.453] and subsequently isolated the biggest object with the [`find_objects`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.ndimage.find_objects.html) function of *SciPy* [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2].
The border of this largest object represents the smallest possible region in which the tooth is contained.
By removing the empty parts of each three-dimensional dataset containing no information about the teeth, we reduced the size of all datasets nearly three-fold, to approximately 1.11 GB per sample, or a total of 115 GB for all 104 teeth thus facilitating further handling of the data.

#### Overview images for visual examination

For quick visual assessment of each of the tooth scans, we extracted overview images for each tooth. After cropping the datasets, we extracted the middle slices and generated the maximum intensity projection (MIP) for each of the anatomical planes [@https://w.wiki/_K2r].
Since the teeth were scanned rotationally invariant, the two anatomical planes along the long axis of the tooth (coronal and sagittal) are not related to the real tooth anatomy and simply correspond to the respective direction in the tomographic dataset.

#### Detection of enamel-dentin border

To facilitate the global characterization of the tooth, we extracted slices at four defined locations along the tooth.
These slices, located at the EDB, the bottom of the tooth and equidistantly between, were then used to describe the root canal configuration with a 4-digit system and to assess the number of main foramina, both according to a previously proposed method [@doi:10.1016/j.joen.2015.09.007].
The location of extracted slices is shown in Figure @fig:3dmevislab.

![Three-dimensional visualization of tooth sample 045.
  This tooth is interesting as it features a 1-2-2/2 root canal configuration as defined by Briseño et al. [@doi:10.1016/j.joen.2015.09.007].
  The extracted pulpa in shown in red, the tooth itself is shown semitransparently.
  The four slices which were automatically extracted based on the enamel-dentin border are also visualized semitransparently in their correct 3D position.
  The whole tooth has a length of 2.39 cm.
  A [video of the 3D visualization is found in the supplementary materials](https://github.com/habi/zmk-tooth-cohort-method-manuscript/blob/master/content/images/tooth045.mp4?raw=true) of this manuscript.](images/Tooth045.MeVisLab.png){#fig:3dmevislab}

This was done by calculating the brightness value along the longest axis of the tooth followed by smoothing of the curve using a [locally weighted scatterplot smoothing](https://www.statsmodels.org/devel/generated/statsmodels.nonparametric.smoothers_lowess.lowess.html) implemented in the *statsmodels* library [@https://www.statsmodels.org/].
By finding the maximal derivation of this curve with *NumPy* [@doi:10.1109/mcse.2011.37], we were easily able to detect the border between enamel and dentin (EDB).
From the part of the tooth below the detected border, we then extracted four equidistant slices.
These slices and an overview of the tooth were written to a separate file for each sample, facilitating characterization of each tooth without manually looking for the correct axial reconstruction (see Figure @fig:extractedslices).

![Slice extraction for characterization of a tooth.
  This tooth features a 1-1-1/1 root canal configuration as defined by Briseño et al. [@doi:10.1016/j.joen.2015.09.007].
  The blue line in the two leftmost panels shows the gray value plot along the longest tooth axis, the orange line shows the smoothed plot.
  Based on the largest derivation we detect the enamel-dentin border at slice 1116 of this dataset.
  Based on the bottom around slice 2839 we extracted the equidistant slices in-between.](images/ExtractedSlices.png){#fig:extractedslices}

#### Pulpa extraction

It was of paramount importance for the analysis to visualize the pulpa inside the tooth.
We thus wrote a function to extract the pulpa based on its appearance in the axial slices of the datasets.
By using an automated Otsu thresholding implemented in *scikit-image* [@doi:10.7717/peerj.453] on each slice of the datasets, we separated the tooth from the background.
By inversion of the image we select all that is not tooth.
From this, we remove all the pixels that touch the image border i.e. the air surrounding the tooth, with the [`clear_border`](https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.segmentation.html\#skimage.segmentation.clear_border) function.
We further removed speckles in the remains and closed small holes in the remaining image data to extract the pulpa from inside the tooth (with the [`remove_small_objects`](https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.morphology.html\#skimage.morphology.remove_small_objects) and
[`remove_small_holes`](https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.morphology.html\#skimage.morphology.remove_small_holes) functions, respectively). 
Datasets of the pulpa have again been written to disk for further analysis and display. 
Since these are binarized datasets, we were able to store them on disk very efficiently, with the total size of all 104 pulpa datasets being only 309 MB.
Display of the datasets for visual assessment was done with *itkwidgets* [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3974615], permitting a basic 3D visualization of each tooth for quality control (an example is shown in Figure @fig:3ditkwidgets).

![Basic 3D visualization directly from our preparation and analysis pipeline.
  This tooth is interesting as it features a 1-2-2/2 root canal configuration as defined by Briseño et al. [@doi:10.1016/j.joen.2015.09.007].
  The whole tooth has a length of 2.39 cm.](images/Tooth045.itkwidgets.png){#fig:3ditkwidgets}

### Analysis of the physiological foramen geometry

The apical foramen of the teeth was evaluated as previously described [@doi:10.1038/ijos.2017.29.] by assessing the bottom part of each tooth using *Fiji* [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.2019] to scroll through the stack of images and measure the diameter of the physiological and anatomical foramen as well as the distance between the physiological and anatomical foramina.
The physiological (main) foramen was defined as one with a diameter of 0.20 mm or more.
Foramina with diameters smaller than 0.20 mm were defined as accessory ones [@doi:10.1038/ijos.2017.29].
Since we have extracted the pulpa for each tooth, we can easily calculate its diameter at each point, that is, exactly calculate the exact Euclidean distance transform (EDT) where each 3D voxel of the pulpa is labelled with its distance relative to the background (wall of the canal).
We used the [`morphology.distance_transform_edt`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy-0.14.0/reference/generated/scipy.ndimage.morphology.distance_transform_edt.html) function of the *SciPy* [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2] library for this.
To aid the assessment of the geometry of the physiological foramen, we extracted the bottom 3.5 mm part of each tooth, merged the reconstructed slices of the data with the calculated EDT from the pulpa and wrote this data to disk reformatted into sagittal
slices.
In such a way, the radius of the largest sphere fitted into the pulpa at each point can easily be read off the image upon visual examination.
The use of the *Dask* library facilitated efficient reformatting of the datasets and writing them to disk.
